German Chancellor Olaf schz is in Egypt
and says Germany wants to support
Egypt's mediation efforts and help to
deescalate following Hamas Terror
attacks on Israel Schultz and the
Egyptian president Abdel fat alisi
discussed the humanitarian situation in
Gaza the chancellor traveled to Cairo
following a visit to Tel Aviv where he
expressed Germany's solidarity with
Israel now let's uh listen into what he
said at a joint press conference with
the Egyptian president
together we are working on humanitarian
access to Gaza as soon as
possible people there are in need of
water food and medication I can assure
you at this point we will not leave the
people alone the German government will
continue its humanitarian efforts for
Gaza to ease the suffering of the
civilian
population Egypt is key to the
humanitarian Aid Chancellor Schulz
mentioned there with the Israeli border
closed the only way in and out of Gaza
is the Rafa border crossing with Egypt
mediators are already working to let
desperately needed Aid pass in through
Rafa and allow foreign Nationals and the
wounded out Egypt said it was forced to
close the border after Israeli strikes
on October 10th and 11th and is working
to reopen it trucks carrying eight are
heading to the Border but it's still
clear if they can
cross now let's take a closer look at
Egypt's complex role in the current
crisis neighbor to Gaza and Israel Egypt
holds a strategic and historical place
in the conflict Cairo opposed to the
formation of Israel in 1948 and the two
states have fought several
Wars sections of land passed back and
forth between flareups Egypt took
control of the Gaza Strip when its
borders were first drawn in
1949 but less than 20 years later Israel
claimed it during The Six Day War at the
same time seizing the siai
peninsula in 1979 Cairo was handed back
the peninsula and the two states signed
a peace deal Egypt became the first Arab
country to recognize the state of Israel
the two Nations have had mostly peaceful
relations since and have cooperated on
issues like
security past governments have mediated
between Israel and Hamas which has
historical ties to Egypt the militant
islamist group began as a Palestinian
branch of the Muslim Brotherhood which
was founded in Egypt the Muslim
Brotherhood briefly held power after the
Egyptian revolution in 2011 but was
ousted by current president abdal fat CI
in a coup the group has been outlawed in
EGP
Egypt despite cooperation with Israel
sentiment amongst Egyptians is largely
for the Palestinian cause and crowds in
Cairo have been rallying against
Israel's bombardment of
Gaza with an election due in December
the government is standing firm on
borders and security and says it will
not allow a mass movement from
Gaza Egypt fears it could become
responsible for millions of Palestinian
refugees like leanon and Jordan before
it Cairo has said Palestinians should
not be forced to flee their land and has
advocated for a two-state
solution the government said it rejects
the killing of any civilians it has
urged restraint and said Israel's
response to hamas's terrorist attack now
amounts to Collective
punishment Egypt is working to mediate
along with other International partners
and to create a humanitarian Lifeline
for civilians in
Gaza Let's cross over to Cairo where a
journalist bahir Amin is standing by but
here earlier in the show we heard the
German Chancellor reiterating Israel's
right to defend itself does Egypt
agree Egypt has in general not
contradicted that but the difference in
what Egypt has reiterated in the cycle
of violence is that Israel has gone
beyond its right to defend itself into
Collective punishment um so that incl
Israel targeting civilians targeting
Health Facilities depriving 2.4 million
people of essential needs including food
water electricity and
fuel now um Schultz was expected to push
for the rougher crossing the only border
crossing between Gaza and Egypt to be
reopened has there been any progress on
that um we were expecting that it's the
same level of the same line of
communication that's happened between
KIRO and every European beader um and we
did get that President reiterated
Egypt's commitment keeping ra open said
they had never closed it on the Egyptian
side but that Israeli air strikes on the
Palestinian border post had for it had
forced its closure at this point
hundreds of trucks full of a still
waiting on the Egyptian side of the
Border uh pressure for them to be
allowed in uh is reaching of Crescendo
but with Egyptian leaders reiterating
that it's the air strikes and they still
working on it they're still
collaborating with the UN with Israel
with allies that there doesn't seem to
be any Focus humanitarian workers at say
they still don't have any kind of
timeline now several International
leaders have now visited Egypt asking
for its intervention and what role does
Cairo hope to play
here so Cairo has been very clear um
during the current violence uh on its
role which can be think which can be
thought of in three ways um first it
maintains its historical role as a key
mediator between Israel and Hames um
urging restraint pushing diplomacy
inviting world leaders to a peace Summit
next Saturday second it sees itself as
the guarant tour of humanitarian Aid um
the world is treating it as such it is
bowed to secure Aid through the ra
Crossing again the only passage in and
out of Gaza not controlled by Israel um
Egypt's foreign minister has said
yesterday that once the crossing is safe
humanitarian and medical cases will be
allowed into Egypt um third and the most
telling part of CT speech today um has
Cairo positioning itself in refusing to
admit larger numbers of refugees as the
champion of Palestinian statehood and
the keeper of regional peace
um he warned that the danger that Force
displacement of Gaza um the for of Gaza
into Egypt would would equate the force
displacement of the bank into Jordan and
bring an end to the goal of Palestinian
statehood um he also said that a mass
Exodus into Sinai would make the
peninsula a new base for armed
operations against Israel which would
cause the Region's most fundamental
peace treaty between Egypt and Israel to
fall
apart now if we're looking at public
opinion in in Egypt and also how
politics might be influenced how has the
Hospital blast in Gaza affected the
efforts at a diplomatic
intervention um on the humanitarian
front it is definitely amped up pressure
um the humanitarian situation in Gaza
was already catastrophic um with every
massive loss of life it gets pushed
further over the edge um victims from
the hospital last night for example were
transferred to another hospital that was
already hosting some 30,000 displaced
people um diplomatically we've seen that
am men that men meeting was canceled
Biden has PRS to be in contact with Arab
leaders he was meant to meet there um
but there's no further information on
what that will actually look like um in
terms of public opinion it Remains the
Same um in Egypt there's a there's
discourse among charity workers and
civil society that we do have an
obligation to both let Aid in and let
those in need um to be treated in
Egyptian hospitals but not support the
force displacement of
Palestinians but remind me why is eg
Egypt not opening the uh Rafa Crossing
there into both
directions um so first of all there was
um an agreement earlier this week fell
through between Egypt us and Israel uh
because Egypt refused to let foreign
Nationals out through rafah if Aid was
not allowed in um and now we're seeing
this um especially today in CC Speech he
warned again that the danger of Gins
being displaced in to Egypt would
therefore lead to uh the receivement of
the West Bank Palestinians into Jordan
um Palestinian president abz has also
warned that Gaza is facing a repeat of
Thea in 1948 the mass displacement of
Palestinians in the creation of the
state of Israel um it also not wor to
note that most of the population of Gaza
are refugees who were driven from their
homes um in
1948 um and then so there is the fear
that once Palestinians flee their homes
in search of safety those homes are gone
forever
um so CC also said that that propos um
that proposal holds immense risk to the
Region's most fundamental peace treaty
as you said Egypt was the first Arab
state to recognize Israel in
1979 B here Amin there in Cairo for us
thank you very
much